Topics
---
Trees, Binary Trees

What is a Tree?
---
A tree is a graph that is *connected* and *acyclic*.

Usually, a "tree" is more precisely described as a _rooted tree_.

Tree Representation
---
  A generic tree can be implemented in various ways:

  1. Fast `listChildren()`:

  ```
  class TreeNode {
        T data;
        List<TreeNode> children;
  }
  ```
  2. Fast `listChildren()` as well as `getParent()`:

  ```
  class TreeNode {
        T data;
        T parent;
        List<TreeNode> children;
  }
  ```
  3. Space-efficient but slow `listChildren()`:

  ```
  class TreeNode {
        T data;
        TreeNode leftChild;
        TreeNode rightSibling;
  }
  ```

  This representation is known as [left-child right-sibling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Left-child_right-sibling_binary_tree).

  A detailed discussion on [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14015525/what-is-the-left-child-right-sibling-representation-of-a-tree-why-would-you-us/14015526#14015526).

Conclusion:  
There is no _one best_ representation. Optimality depends largely on requirements, a.k.a., the methods you want to support on a tree.

Space-Tree Tradeoff
---
The aforementioned left-child right-sibling representation sacrifices fast lookup of children in favor of space. This is known as [_space-time tradeoff_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space%E2%80%93time_tradeoff) and is a common scene in computer science.

Other salient examples:
* Bucket sort vs O(n logn) comparison-based sorting algorithms
* Dictionary enables fast lookup by introducing extra overhead
* TwoSum can be solved in linear time using a HashMap but needs linear extra space whereas it can also be solved in O(nlogn) time but with constant extra space.
* Dynamic programming stores extra information to achieve better time complexity

List of Problems
----
1. [Kuai Yu] Given a list of edges (represented as (parent, child) tuples) of a tree, how do we
  * find its root
  * find its leaves
  * print the tree?

  Code source: from_edges_to_tree.py

  By definition, a tree root is a node that is a parent of another node but not a child of another node.

  The following solution to `find_root()` was promptly proposed:
    ```python
    def find_root_naive(list_of_edges):
      all_nodes = set()
      for parent, child in list_of_edges:
        all_nodes.add(parent)
        all_nodes.add(child)
      for parent, child in list_of_edges:
        all_nodes.discard(child)
      return all_nodes.pop()
    ```
  `first_root_naive()` first stores all nodes in a Set `all_nodes`. Then all child nodes get removed from `all_nodes` and what's left is the root.

  The following slightly modified version does not work. Can you detect why?
  ```python
  def find_root_wrong(list_of_edges):
    all_nodes = set()
    for parent, child in list_of_edges:
      all_nodes.add(parent)
      all_nodes.discard(child)
    return all_nodes.pop()
  ```

  Observing that `find_root_naive` scans `list_of_edges` twice, Kuai asked what if the edges were provided in a streaming fashion in which case an entire record of `list_of_edges` is not available.

  One way of solving `find_root()` is to keep two Sets: `parents` and `children`. Set `parents` contains all nodes that has appeared as a parent. Similarly, Set `children` contains all nodes that has appeared as a child. Then the desired root is `parents - children` where `-` represents [set difference](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Python_Programming/Sets#Set_Difference).

  `find_root()` can also be implemented with a dictionary named `is_child`. The dictionary maps a node to a boolean representing whether or not it has appeared as a child in some (parent, child) relationship. The desired root is the node such that `is_child[node] == False`.

  `first_root_using_set()` and `first_root_using_dict()` have similar performance in terms of running time and memory usage. But when the nodes' strings are long then the dictionary approach has an edge over the set approach. Why?

  Finding leaves is very similar to finding the root.

  `find_root()` and `find_leaves()` satisfy the goal without building the entire tree. The next question tests the candidate's ability to build and traverse a tree.

  `print_dfs()` uses a Stack to perform depth-first traversal of the tree. In addition to storing the nodes, we need to store the level of each node.

  `print_level_order()` uses a Queue to perform breadth-first traversal of the tree. Printing a tree level by level is a very common interview question. Use [this problem](https://leetcode.com/problems/binary-tree-level-order-traversal/) for practice.

2.


Python Tips
---
1. [collections.defaultdict](https://docs.python.org/2/library/collections.html#collections.defaultdict): a more concise dictionary
2. [collections.deque](https://docs.python.org/2/library/collections.html#collections.deque) Python's Queue implementation.
3. `set.dicard()`: removing an element from a set if it's present and doesn't throw Exception otherwise.
